Galcon
# tags python

Over the last week, I've spent far too much time playing `Galcon
<http://www.imitationpickles.org/galcon/index.html>`__, an addictive
game developed by Phil Hassey using Pygame and other tools.

In Galcon, you are a general out for conquest.  You start with one or
a few planets that produce fighters, and you're pitted against
"independent" planets and other players, either robots or humans.  You
send fighters out to take over other planets and get their production
rate working for you.  The controls are simple, the games are pretty
short -- 15 minutes is a long game -- and it's easy to join an online
game.

Apart from the clickfest nature of the game, my academic leanings
appreciate the sort of game theory involved in playing.  Especially
in the beginning, you're in a sort of tense situation where making
a move in one direction invites an attack from the other direction.
This also occurs throughout the game, when (for example) there's a
clearly dominant player A facing players B and C.  Who should attack
whom?  A attacking B invites an attack on A from C, and so on.  Often
A will sit there and grow stronger, while B and C wait it out.  If 
B attacks, often C will help them until it looks like A is one the ropes,
and then C will backstab B.  Lots of fun.

Likewise, an enduring source of frustration is players who don't seem
to understand this: today I got taken out of five or six games when
I was weak and the other weak guy attacked me.  Naturally the strong
guy wiped us both out.  (Note that there's no second place...)

Another nice thing about the game: logistics, logistics, logistics.
I've had a few games where I won even though I was down because I
owned a tighter cluster of planets.  That let me resupply more quickly
than the other guy.

There are a number of problems with the game, but overall it's a lot of
fun.  I highly recommend it.

--titus

p.s. Be sure to pressure Phil to add board generation and 'bot plugin
capabilities to the game!  After all, it's written in Python...
