The grim future for sequencing centers
# tags science, bioinformatics

In conversation with a colleague the other day, I found myself making
a surprising prediction: the age of the big sequencing centers (Broad
Institute, WUSTL, Baylor, DOE JGI, etc.) is coming to an end.  In 5
years they will no longer exist.

This prediction is obvious in hindsight.

That is all.

Hah! No, seriously, I've had a number of interactions with sequencing
centers over the last decade, and I feel that many of them are failing
to make the transition from hugely-funded centers containing lots of
cloning expertise and bajillions of ABI Sanger sequencing machines, to
centers of genome expertise and analysis.  The new reality of
holy-cow-everyone-can-sequence-whatever-they-want, brought on Roche
454, Illumina GA, ABI SOLiD, and soon Pacific Biosystems, is driving
this.  It is now possible to sequence entire animal genomes in private
facilities funded by single-investigator grants, which replaces the
primary raison d'etre of big sequencing centers... so what next?

The new challenge of sequencing is in assembly and analysis of the
data, and I think everyone is just overwhelmed here.  Certainly when I
talk to people at sequencing centers, they are capable of generating
far more new sequence than they are of assembling or analyzing the
sequence they generated last week.  For example, the latest lamprey
genome assembly was done by Jeramiah Smith in Chris Amemiya's lab, not
by WUSTL; and the basic gene set is being constructed by Carson Holt
in Mark Yandell's lab in Utah, not by ENSEMBL.  The wait time to get
into the assembly and analysis queues, and the iteration time needed
to integrate new mRNAseq data into the gene set, is simply too great
at the centers.  Analysis of a large soil metagenomics project (200 gb
and counting!) in collaboration with the JGI is running into machine
access issues: none of us have quick access to machines capable of
running the analyses quickly, although I appear to be the closest
because of the `MSU HPC <http://hpc.msu.edu>`__.

Contrast this situation with other examples: for example, my recent
trip to Mississippi State, where I had a great conversation with a
graduate student who is assembling a brown mold genome, all on her
own, on a lab machine, with no prior computational experience.  Or
some friends at Caltech, who have sequenced, assembled, and analyzed
both the genome and transcriptome of a worm -- all on their own, with
no center involvement.  I mean, these people are all ridiculously
smart and competent, but I think there are a lot of such people in
academia.  They just needed cheap sequencing to challenge them!

I wish I could blame the centers for lack of vision or something, but
honestly I think they're just the biggest targets for everyone at the
moment.  People are used to the "mainframe model" of sequencing, where
you go to the sequencing center with your genome in hand and beg the
high poobahs to sequence, assemble, and annotate it for you; but their
funding for computer power and analysis hasn't kept up with the sequencing
bonanza (nor could it have), so now they are simply the most visible
people failing to keep up with analysis.  Unfair but whatcha gonna do?

Are there centers that are keeping up?  It's hard for me to say, since
I'm not in the rarified bajillion-dollar-PI meetings (note: I'm
available for such meetings, folks; I bring 20 years of computational
experience, a corresponding `deep cynicism
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/may-10/data-management>`__, and 10 years
of bioinformatics to the table, plus a taste for expensive scotch.
Reserve me today!).  But I note that the Beijing Genome Institute has
a distressing habit of publishing "firsts", including the short-read
Panda genome paper and a Human Microbiome Project.  I have concerns
about their long-term viability but that will have to wait for another
blog post...

OK, so what's the future, mr. smarty pants?  Damned if I know.  Paul
Sternberg has a great quote that is my touchstone, though: the
biggest, most exciting advances come from the sharpshooter on the hill
rather than the army toiling across the plain.  I've never been
excited by large collaborations, which tend to get embroiled in
management issues and politics; while there are some places (like
HPCs) where centralization is good, lots of individual investigators
are much more likely to generate the diversity of approaches that I
think we need.

And did I mention `training?
<http://bioinformatics.msu.edu/ngs-summer-course-2010>`__  Whoops, so
silly of me to forget that.

Regardless, I think we're in for a wild and wooly ride on the next-gen
sequencing train, and the next few years should be incredibly
exciting.  It's great to be a (computational) biologist!

--titus
