TALK: Open Source at Microsoft: The Past, Present, and Future
# tags python,oss,msu,snakebite

I'd like to invite you to attend the last of the Michigan State
University CSE colloquia for the 2008-2009 academic year: jointly
sponsored as an AT&T Visiting Lecturer by the MSU LCT, and the CSE
department, Sam Ramji will speak about

   Open Source at Microsoft: The Past, Present and Future

in CommArts room 147, Friday May 1, at 11:00am.  I encourage you all to
attend and to forward this on to others who might be interested!  As you
know, open source software is playing an increasingly big part in
education, academia, science, and business, and so I expect this to be
a very interesting talk.

Contact me at ctb@msu.edu for further information.

--

Abstract:

Since Microsoft established its Open Source Lab in Redmond more than
five years ago, it has worked with many open source players to make
Windows the best platform for all applications to run on. But this has
not been without its challenges and there is a lot more work to be done
on this front. This talk will cover the thinking behind Microsoft's
current open source strategy and what this means for the software
engineers of the future. It will also spotlight some innovative Open
Source projects the company is supporting at universities across the
world.

Biography:

Sam Ramji is the Senior Director of Platform Strategy leading
Microsoft's platform strategy efforts across the company, including
long-term strategic planning in the Windows Server and Tools
organization. Sam's primary focus is to drive Microsoft's Linux and Open
Source Strategy, working together with Microsoft technology development
teams and open source communities to build interoperable solutions.

Prior to his current role at Microsoft, Sam was a Director of Emerging
Business working on the Silicon Valley Campus where he managed
relationships with Venture Capitalists and entrepreneurs. Prior to
joining Microsoft, Sam led technical product strategy at BEA Systems,
engineering teams building large-scale applications on Open Source
software (at Ofoto.com) as well as hands-on development of client,
client-server, and distributed applications on Unix, Windows, and
Macintosh at prior companies.

Sam holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Cognitive Science from the
University of California at San Diego, and is a member of the Institute
for Generative Leadership. 
