Missive from a Swing State
# tags personal,politics

I have a habit of occasionally sending odd e-mails to my postdoc lab mailing
list, for reasons that I cannot adequately explain.  Here's the latest one: ::

  Dear Bronner-Fraser Lab,

  I would like to thank you all for your private letters of support;
  between the blizzards of Colorado, the floods of Texas, and the
  red-v-blue fighting in Michigan, it's been a tough year for us newly
  independent Bronner-Fraser-ites!

  Now that McCain has withdrawn his cadre from Michigan and Obama has
  successfully captured the bastion of Michigan State (strategically
  located next to the capitol of Michigan!), I expect the out-and-out
  party fighting to die down, at least in the streets of Lansing.  While
  fiercely partisan Reds will probably continue to snipe at us for a
  while, Obama continues to clear Lansing block-by-block in his advance
  with forces of crushing superiority.  However, the newly added wrinkle
  of the pro- and anti-bailout forces (or, as they're known locally, the
  Inflationists and the Depressionists) leads me to believe that we are
  not long for peace here; more on that soon.

  Overall, we've been very lucky.  Our compound is located far enough
  away from densely populated areas that we haven't been affected much
  by the fighting, and some of our local friends who are less fortunate
  have bolstered our ranks.  Armored vehicles continue to roam the main
  roads, but again, we're not close enough to them to be affected.  We
  do have a local supply of drinking water, and so far the mine fields
  are holding up; I do worry a bit about the ammo situation, but I've
  directed everyone to switch away from automatics until we get a new
  shipment in.

  Internet has not been interrupted, although this is a mixed blessing;
  I've had to stop communicating with one of the few remaining die-hard
  conservatives I know, because his e-mails were correlated with attacks
  by the local McCain militia.  I have come to believe that he was
  hitting me with pro-Palin blogs as a distraction technique, although I
  quickly saw through the tactic -- even the conservatives don't think
  she's viable any more.

  Anyway, I'll continue to keep you all updated as the fight continues.

  best,
  --titus

Please send ammo!
