The Parable of the Mad Photocopier
# tags fail

(I came across this fragmentary blog post that I wrote sometime in December.
It's a fine example of a failed allegory.  To what, I'll let you determine
for yourself.  Anyway, in case anyone wants to know what dreck *doesn't*
make it out of my computer onto the Intarweb, well, here's some.  Which
obviously made it out.  Never mind... you get it...)

Once upon a time, there was a man named Mr. Darkena.  He was more than
a little nuts: his passtime was traveling to all the libraries in the
world, and photocopying every book he could find.  He didn't even use
a normal photocopier; he use a special little instrument he'd made just
for the purpose.

The instrument worked in a rather odd way.  When Mr. Darkena (a.k.a. the
Mad Photocopier) put a book in his instrument, it made many copies of the
book -- but not *complete* copies.  Rather, it made copies of partial
sentences, chosen randomly from within the book.  In order to make sure
he had a copy of every sentence, the Mad Photocopier had to set his machine
to make lots and lots of photocopies for each book.

The instrument had another problem: it wasn't terribly accurate.  Each
sentence it photocopied generally had a blotch on it that changed one
or more of the letters in the sentence.  (The Mad Photocopier either wasn't
a great engineer, or he bought low-cost toner.)

Now, running this machine was the Mad Photocopier's hobby: he
traveled around the world and fed books into his machine.  And since
he was independently wealthy, he did it a *lot*.  In fact, by the time
he turned 60 and was thinking about retiring, he'd actually copied
every book from every library, in every language!  All this was stored
in a giant silo, in no particular order.

Coincidentally, the day after he turned 60, the Vogons came and
demolished the Earth, to make way for a hyperspace bypass.  The Mad
Photocopier hitched a ride, and he brought along his private
collection of book copies -- now the last and only remnant of
humankind.  Millions upon millions of copies of books, all in little
fragmentary sentences, with lots of little toner blobs all over them.

---

Suppose you want to read one of these books in its entirety, from start to finish.   Can you?

The first question is, is it likely that you *have* the information in
the book in its entirety?  If the Mad Photocopier didn't sample that
particular book an awful lot, then you may be missing sentences,
paragraphs, or even entire pages.  But let's suppose that the Mad
Photocopier really was just plain nuts, and you're pretty sure the
book is in there.  How do you put it together?

The basic problem is that you want to figure out which sentences go
with which other sentences.  Because the sentence fragments are chosen
randomly, you have to check each sentence fragment against every other
sentence fragment somehow to see if they overlap.  This would be
pretty easy, except that the sentence fragments aren't always correct
copies: they may have blotches in the overlap.  So you need to check
for overlaps in some way that permits partial or fuzzy matches.

If you think this through, though, you may notice a few more
challenges.

The first is that there are, literally, trillions or more of sentence
fragments to check -- remember, millions of billions of books!  That's
going to take a while...

The second is that you've got to remember which fragments connect to
which other fragments.  That's a lot of stuff to remember...

A third thing is that any one fragment may be wrong at any one part of
the sentence.  If you want to make sure you have the *correct* sentence,
you can line up all the fragments that contain that sentence and use
the linup to correct for any mistakes.

A fourth issue is that books come in multiple editions and sometimes get
combined into anthologies or put into Reader's Digest, so you will
have to worry about sentences that look similar but actually come from
(sometimes *very*) different texts.

A fifth issue is that some books are way more common or popular than
others.  For example, Huckleberry Finn has been assigned reading in
junior high for 50 years or more -- you'd better bet that most libraries
have a few copies of it.  Same with the Encyclopedia Brittanica.  But
there will also be some rare books that aren't popular.  So you'll have
lots and lots of fragments from some books, and very few from others.

(There are lots more issues, but let's stick with these.)

----

Yep, I gave up here.  It just wasn't working for me.

--titus
