John Ringo is a caricature of a wingnut
# tags books

I read a lot of total crap, and one of my recurring crap authors has
been John Ringo.  He's a total nutjob politically, but he writes good
battle scenes and is an enjoyable read once you cut through the
nonsense.  Still, I'm having a tough time getting through the opening
chapters of `The Last Centurion
<http://www.webscription.net/chapters/1416555536/1416555536_toc.htm>`__.
In this book, Ringo constructs a near-future world where Hillary
Clinton is president, global *cooling* is the problem, and the
chemicals from processed food and big farming are life saving.

Let's take those one at a time.

One of Ringo's favorite tropes is that the left, and the Clintons
especially, are what's wrong with America.  It's hard to convey the
dripping scorn with which he discusses these topics, but it involves a
lot of naughty words.  In this book, Hillary Clinton (or a straw woman
facsimile thereof) is president through the Big Chill and the
simultaneous deadly bird flu outbreak, and she makes every mistake
possible.  While Hillary Clinton is not my favorite politician, it's
worth noting that our current president (who can do little wrong in
Ringo's eyes) has *actually* made almost every mistake possible, and
this makes Ringo's text unbearably difficult to read.  If Ringo is
hoping to even tell a good story, much less sway anyone's opinion, he'd
be better off with less in the way of textual histrionics.

Another one of Ringo's tropes is that the global warming hypothesis is
nonsense.  Not only does he mention this frequently, but he literally
pauses in the middle of his books to deliver four page diatribes on
the subject.  In this latest book, Ringo makes the next big climate
change event a major solar COOLING, which has predictable effects on
the food supply. Now, I'm a scientist and a lefty, and I've even
worked on science relevant to climate change, so presumably (by
Ringo's criteria) I am unfit to comment, being moderately
knowledgeable.  But when your social commentary depends *entirely* on
fiction, it loses any relevance and becomes a distraction.

The most interesting novelty in this book (which presumably will
become another abortive series, to join the ranks of his other five
unfinished series?) is the device where American lives are saved by
having eaten so many processed foods.  As far as I can tell, the idea
is that eating processed foods conveys resistance to chicken flu, and
this leads to a dramatically greater survival rate in America.  I'm
not sure why this device is in the book, unless it's another imaginary
nail in Ringo's imaginary coffin of liberalism.  Whyever it's there,
it's entertainingly stupid -- there's plenty of evidence that weird,
random chemicals do weird, random things to your DNA, and that's one
reason why cancer is so prevalent.  There's no reason at all to
believe that these chemicals would somehow "cancel out" bird flu.  But
what do I know?  I'm just a molecular freakin' biologist...

Combine all that with Ringo's inimitable writing style in which no
breasts are too big, no hero goes unfucked by multiple
(large-breasted) women, and no terrorist goes unpunished, and these
books are truly a piece of work.  I do *not*, however, mean "of art".
In fact, this last book is so outlandish that I'm actually becoming a
bit suspicious of Ringo's sincerity.  It's hard to read such complete
and utter crap without thinking that perhaps the author is secretly
making fun of the very viewpoints he is espousing.  But it's been
a consistent trend towards lunacy thus far, so I'm inclined to believe
that he's actually somewhat sincere.

Anyway, here's my judgement: Ringo's latest book is masturbatory
fodder for hard right wingers, and it's becoming increasingly
difficult to enjoy his books if you're not actually lobotomized.
Luckily that ensures him an 18% market.

--titus
