PyCon '08 Tutorial Proposal - RFC, and suggested projects.
# tags python,testing

Hey everyone,

Grig and I are thinking of doing another tutorial at PyCon '08, but
we'd like to break out of the mold of "intro testing" and do something
more exciting for us.  Here's a promotional blurb: ::

  Practical Agile Web Testing
  ---------------------------

  Have Web site?  Need testing?  Bring your tired (code), huddled (unit
  tests), and cranky AJAX to us; we'll help you come up with tactics,
  techniques, and infrastructure to help solve your problems.  This
  includes integration with a unit test runner (nose); use of coverage
  analysis (figleaf); straight HTTP driver Web testing (twill); Web
  recording, examination, and playback (scotch); Selenium and Selenium
  RC test script development; and continuous integration (buildbot).
  We will focus on techniques for automating your Web testing for quick
  turnaround, i.e. "agile" test automation.

Full proposal "below the jump", as they say.  Comments welcome!

The plan is to have attendees send us their projects in advance, along
with some of the real-world problems they need solved.  This can range
from "HELP, I need to start testing!" to "What should I do next?" to
"How can I test this !#%!%$ JavaScript??"  We will then actually
implement test code and infrastructure to solve these
problems. Getting this to work right will be challenging but fun --
Grig and I both love doing live presentations.

We could use some suggestions, though: in case we get a lot of
attendees but no one sends us projects in advance, we'd like to have a
few projects on our back burner.  What Python Web projects need this
kind of testing?  Go ahead, hit us ;)

--titus

Full proposal: ::

  Title: Practical Agile Web Testing (Hands-On)
  
  Presenters: C. Titus Brown <titus@idyll.org>
  	    Grig Gheorghiu <grig@gheorghiu.net>
  
  Intended audience: advanced users.
  
  Tutorial format: hands-on / Q&A.  Attendees should send us actual problems
  	 from open source projects that need solving (preferably more than
  	 an hour in advance...)
  
  Recording: We give permission to record and publish my PyCon tutorial for
  	   free distribution.
  
  Requirements: Python 2.5 or 2.6 installed.  We'll provide media with up-to-date
  	      packages at the tutorial.
  
  Notes for reviewers: we've done two testing tutorials before, with good
        comments afterward.  The goal here is to break out of the mold of
        pre-planned presentations and tackle some real-life problems for people.
        We will prepare in advance, but using other people's source code as
        a starting point.
  
  Promotional summary:
  
  Have Web site?  Need testing?  Bring your tired (code), huddled (unit
  tests), and cranky AJAX to us; we'll help you come up with tactics,
  techniques, and infrastructure to help solve your problems.  This
  includes integration with a unit test runner (nose); use of coverage
  analysis (figleaf); straight HTTP driver Web testing (twill); Web
  recording, examination, and playback (scotch); Selenium and Selenium
  RC test script development; and continuous integration (buildbot).
  We will focus on techniques for automating your Web testing for quick
  turnaround, i.e. "agile" test automation.
  
  Detailed tutorial outline: A 30 minute introduction to the basic testing
  	 philosophy and tools, followed by discussion and implementation
  	 details for the individual problems we have chosen.
  
  Presenter bios:
  
  Titus Brown is a CS professor at Michigan State U. and a contributor
  to numerous open source projects, including twill, scotch, figleaf,
  and nose. Grig Gheorghiu is the Director of Technology at RIS
  Technology, a Web hosting company. Grig maintains the Python Testing
  Tools Taxonomy wiki page, and he blogs fairly regularly on Python and
  agile testing topics at http://agiletesting.blogspot.com.  Together
  with Jason Huggins, they are the authors of **An Introduction to
  Functional Web Testing with twill and Selenium**.
  
  Previous experience:
  
  Grig and Titus have given two previous testing tutorials at PyCon '06
  and '07, with positive results.  They both speak regularly at PyCons
  and they are also organizers of the SoCal PIGgies group where they
  present regularly.
