A call for open lab and reusable lab protocols
# tags duh

About a year ago, I came across a really interesting Science paper
entitled "Rapid and inefficient isolation of single cells from soil".
In it, the authors -- from a well-known lab at UC Davis -- described
how they used low-percentage agarose gels to extract thousands of
individual cells from a soil sample, split them into a microtitre
plate, apply single-cell amplification and massively parallel
barcoding, and then sequence them in aggregate.  It didn't need any
specialized hardware, and could be done with off the shelf hardware.
What was even cooler is that the bioinformatics was very
straightforward and used completely open tools.  Awesome!

My postdoc set out to try it on our own sample, and immediately ran into
problems.  The percentage of the agarose gel wasn't specified, and neither
was the brand; we couldn't get similar results on the separation.  The
brand of the microtitre plate also wasn't specified in the paper, and
we were worried that there was something different with our sample.

We contacted the authors and spent several frustrating e-mail
exchanges trying to get all the information.  They were forthcoming
about many things, but wouldn't tell us their procedure for mixing the
agar, which was key -- it turns out they were thinking of commercializing
the process, and their lawyers had advised them not to let it out.
Separately, there were several protocols in the lab for doing the
barcoding, and it emerged that they weren't quite sure which one had
been used for the data published in the paper.

Undeterred, I shipped my postdoc out to the Davis lab to collaborate
with them.  She came back having been unable to replicate their
experiments, but with a much greater appreciation for the complexity
of the process.

We finally got things working in our lab, and went to publish our own
protocol and results.  At that point, a new wrinkle emerged: the details
of the original protocol were copyrighted and had only been licensed
for the purpose of use, not for adaptation and reuse.  So we couldn't
publish a derivative protocol without first buying a license from the
UC system!  That took another 6 months to arrange with lawyers.

In the end, we submitted the paper for review, and it just got
published.  We've been asked multiple times for our protocol, but
unfortunately we can only point them towards the authors of the first
paper, because we don't have a license to distribute the original
protocol.  But at least we got our publication!

--titus

p.s.  This is a fictional story, illustrating how most papers and labs
deal with source code. Replace 'protocol' with 'source code', and reread.
