Organizing my life
# tags personal,python,devon

I've been on the run for well over a year -- I started writing my PhD
thesis in July '06, just after I got back from teaching at Woods Hole.
At the time I was also interviewing for a faculty position at MSU
(`since offered & accepted <http://ged.cse.msu.edu/>`__).  Since then
I've defended my thesis, finished writing it, switched to my post-doc
lab and started a whole new batch of projects, taught a few more
courses (at LLNL and Woods Hole), and spoken at a few conferences.
This month, I've written a 25 page NIH grant, too.

What I have *not* been able to do is finish off much of anything,
other than the grant!  In addition to letting some of my computational
science lapse, I've completely dropped the ball on twill and figleaf
as well as the subprocess patch, and my systems administration is not
going well either...  I even have two consulting gigs that aren't
really proceeding at the moment, although conveniently I've managed
to partly shuffle those off onto someone else's shoulders.

The real kicker is that I have a nice deadline coming up: Tracy and I
are having a baby, probably sometime in the next two weeks, and I'm
going to take the next month or two off.  I certainly won't be doing
experimental work, and I probably won't get much done on the
computational side, either.

The result of all of this is that my TODO list hit a bit of a zenith
this last week: I'd been pushing all the non-grant stuff into it while
I finished the grant proposal, and it reached 500 messages.  As
tempting as `e-mail emancipation
<http://craighuggart.typepad.com/tech_yourself_to_rest/escape-from-email-hell-ch.html>`__
sounds, I think it's really bad manners; and heck, these were all
messages I was *interested* in!  My life, except for some of the
personal/family bits, is organized through e-mail -- and it's a large
part of being an effective scientist these days, I think.  So I spent
about 8 hours going through and sorting the messages.

The twill/figleaf/testing-TODO stuff got put in my twill-todo folder.
(Sorry folks, at the moment the baby and the science get priority.)

I went through all of the journal ToCs and downloaded the papers I was
interested in.  They're all in my DEVONthink folder now, waiting to be
skimmed and renamed appropriately.

A bunch of stuff got moved back into my inbox, which is where I keep
my short-term TODO list.  This includes messages about the tutorials
I'm hoping to write for the biology-in-python list, as well the consulting
work -- I'm gonna try to finish that stuff off before the baby arrives.

The interesting & informative e-mails that I'd been saving for a good
read all went into DEVONthink, appropriately tagged, so that I will
find them if I search for anything related.

The long-term collaboration/data work that I've been saving in my TODO
list also went into DEVONthink, under my lab management folder hierarchy.
This is fodder for undergrads, masters students, and PhD students --
I'm not going to get to this data anytime soon, and it's always good to
have a dozen or so projects lined up for students that get lured into
my net.

Everything else -- about 70-80 messages -- I kept in my TODO folder,
awaiting random chance and/or some attention from me.

The two points of this blog entry, such as they are, are:

 - don't expect much of out of me for the next few months.  If someone
   wants to step up and integrate patches into figleaf and twill, I'd
   be very happy; other than that, rest assured that I *will* get to your
   e-mails some day... but maybe not soon ;(.

 - DEVONthink is becoming more and more important a part of my life.
   It's a very handy way to organize both random and structured
   textual data, and it supports the kind of serendipitous discovery
   of linked research interests that I've started to rely on in my
   scientific work.  I highly recommend it for people who are drowning
   in information.

--titus
