The Cartwheel Project: Tools for Regulatory Genomics
# tags python,bioinformatics,testing

It's been a busy few weeks, in part because I've been writing a grant.
Last Thursday, I submitted a grant proposal to NIH for their program
announcement, `Continued Development and Maintenance of Software
<http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-07-235.html>`__.  The
proposal was to continue maintaining Cartwheel, while integrating a
new visualization frontend (MUSSA) and a fast genome-wide motif
searching system based on pygr.  I concentrated on making the point
that building easy-to-use, correct, maintainable, and extensible
software is quite tough all on its own, and that such software has
real research consequences in these days of whole genomes.  This will
probably be read by biologists, which have a different arrogance than
computational biologists; I don't know if I pitched it correctly ;).
I guess we'll find out in a few months.

Anyway, here's the grant abstract.  You can download the Specific Aims
and Background & Significance sections `here <http://ged.cse.msu.edu/downloads/cartwheel-nih-sep2007-short.pdf>`__ if you're interested.  I would be
very interested in references supporting the hypothesis generation and
ease-of-use arguments...

   Understanding gene regulation in detail is a goal of both
   developmental biology and microbial physiology, yet computational
   tools for investigating the function of non-coding sequence remain
   relatively immature.  Simple, intuitive, and powerful tools that allow
   individual bench biologists to explore regulatory function in genomic
   sequence can dramatically increase experimental productivity by both
   generating and eliminating hypotheses.  However, there are very few
   computational tools that let biologists generate and test hypotheses
   about regulatory function, even though the opportunities to integrate
   genomic evidence with experimental design are growing rapidly with the
   increasing number of sequenced genomes.  In particular, there is a
   growing body of techniques used to predict regulatory DNA and
   transcription factor/DNA interactions that is essentially unusable by
   individual biology investigators.
   
   The Cartwheel Project, an existing suite of integrated tools for
   regulatory genomics, was designed in the Davidson Lab at Caltech in
   order to find conserved non-coding sequences in localized genomic
   regions; it is now a standard tool in many labs, because Cartwheel
   fills the desperate need for easy-to-use genomic analysis tools.
   However, Cartwheel was designed before many whole genomes were
   available.  We need to enhance and extend Cartwheel to better interact
   with genome databases and annotations.  We also plan to provide
   accurate and fast multi-genome motif searching and conservation
   analysis, to facilitate the use of multiple pieces of evidence in
   hypothesis generation.  Finally, we need to continue maintaining the
   existing tools, and we also need to develop more educational materials
   on regulatory genomics in order to better support informed research
   with our tools.
   
   Because transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation is
   part of almost every biological process, tools to help biologists
   better study gene regulation will benefit the study of development,
   physiology, and disease.
