SciPy '07: General Report
# tags python,scipy

Last week, SciPy 2007 came to Caltech.  Unfortunately, I wasn't able
to attend many of the talks because I was busy with lab work and other
deadlines, and because SciPy was held immediately upstairs from my lab
I could just duck out to go back to work.  However, I did attend a few
of the talks and found all of them interesting -- and I heard that I
seriously missed out on one or two.  Hopefully other people will blog
about those.

The talks I *am* qualified to comment on are the two other biology-based
ones that I could attend.  One was on pygr, given by Chris Lee, and
the other was on Galaxy, given by James Taylor.  Together with my talk
on Cartwheel, I think they illustrated three entertainingly diverse
approaches to bioinformatics and biology.  Chris focused on addressing
query paradigms (pygr implements a graphic database) as well as data
size issues in alignment and annotation of large sequences.  James
talked a lot about building workflow interfaces to packages, thereby
presenting a possible solution to many of the current problems in
bioinformatics such as formatting, reproducibility, and software
interaction.  And I talked about how Cartwheel provided biologists
with one specific way to answer one specific kind of problem, and did
so in about as simple a manner as you can imagine.  I already have plans
for cross-fertilization...

Hopefully we can attract other bio talks to SciPy next year!

I also gave a rather low-key tutorial on "idiomatic Python", which
went OK but was, well, low-key.  I attended two birds-of-a-feather,
one on testing (organized by fperez) and one on biology (organized by
me).  I'll write more about those later.

The BoFs and the after-talk interactions really convinced me that
SciPy is a very useful conference for meeting other people who have
similar problems to you (perhaps in slightly different fields).  While
I feel the talks are widely scattered by topic, ultimately a lot of
the issues -- data handling, interfaces, visualization, parallelization --
are shared by everyone, and because we all use Python we can actually
use each other's technology!  Very cool stuff.  Next year I'd suggest
having more mixers and shorter presentations, so that we can get more
of a sense of what's going on out there, but that's all I would suggest.

--titus
