Some entertaining issues related to diversity
# tags diversity

a.k.a. "why we should care:"

From the Comp Sci dept WIMS mentor:

   * "In terms of design teams and designing products, there's evidence
     from other industries that if you have just a male team, you could
     have a flawed product. Let's look at air bags, for example. Only 8
     percent of mechanical engineers are female, and most of the teams
     working on air bags were predominantly male. When air bags were
     invented based on the male body as the norm, they ended up being
     potentially deadly to women and children. That's also happened
     with heart valves and voice-recognition systems; they were geared
     toward the male." (J. Margolis, in an interview at
     http://news.cnet.com/2008-1082-833090.html)  Of course, a similar
     concern holds for teams with no minority representation.

   * Is there something in the genetic makeup of women and minorities
     that explains the lack of interest?  Not likely.  This was the
     argument that used to be made for why so few chose science,
     medicine, law, etc. decades ago.  But these fields have made an
     effort to address some of the barriers to women and minorities
     and, as a result, their percentages have increased.

Separately, from Gizmodo via the Interesting People mailing list: ::

  This is awkward. It appears that HP's new webcams, which have facial-      
  tracking software, can't recognize black faces, as evidenced in the
  above video. HP has responded:

  We are working with our partners to learn more. The technology we
  use is built on standard algorithms that measure the difference in
  intensity of contrast between the eyes and the upper cheek and nose. We       
  believe that the camera might have difficulty "seeing" contrast in
  conditions where there is insufficient foreground lighting.

`HP Face-Tracking Webcams Don't Recognize Black People - Hp - Gizmodo <http://gizmodo.com/5431190/hp-face+tracking-webcams-dont-recognize-black-people>`__ (21 December 2009)

What would you want to bet that that development team had only white
people on it?

--titus
